to treat your lumbar discs like it's a
muscle is kind of it's it's going about
it the wrong way. What we want to be
doing with our muscles. Where are we
doing? Are we recording?
Guess what we're doing today, guys? I've
got one of the best jiu-jitsu fighters
in the world. He's got a pretty cool
name, too. What is it? Sebastian. Okay.
Do you see what I mean? You see what I
mean? Anyway, Sebastian Atard, one of
the best jiu-jitsu black belts in the
world. And uh he's going to be doing a
back session with me. When I say back
session, um, he does a lot of great work
by himself. He does how many days a week
of weights?
>> Three.
>> Three days weights. How many days a week
of jiu-jitsu? Oh, how many sessions per
week of jiu-jitsu?
>> 10,
>> maybe.
>> Damn. So, one of the rules that I have
when it comes to training athletes of
non-strength sports. So, his priority is
Brazilian jiu-jitsu, not powerlifting,
not weightlifting. Is to not let the
weightlifting interfere with your
progression in your sport. Right? So,
what I want to do today is not give him
an overhaul on his training. I just want
to see how he deadlifts because I
believe that's a fundamental pattern
that you must have if you want to be
good in sports and you want to be
resilient, if you want to be
injury-free. That's one of the biggest
things that I know with sports is the
people that kind of like last the
longest are the ones that stay
injuryfree or the people that reach the
highest levels. They're the ones that
stay injuryfree for the longest period.
And I'd say that having a strong back is
probably one of the most important
things that you can have as a jiu-jitsu
fighter. So there's a lot of different
choices of exercises you can consider to
have a strong back. You got upper back,
but I'm talking mainly about the lower
back and the hinge pattern, the bend
pattern. And I say the conventional
deadlift, straight up conventional
deadlift, not a variation of, not
Romanian deadlift, not a Jefferson curl,
not a zer deadlift or anything like
that. there variations of that are
fantastic exercises, but the fundamental
base conventional deadlift is number one
and that's what we're going to be
starting with. Okay, so first things
first, I've never seen Seb deadlift
before until now. Let's have a look.
Let's take a look. Check it out. Like as
a coach, for all the coaches at home,
this is how I coach anybody. I don't sit
here and like I know that he's got
general competency. He's not injured. He
doesn't have a back injury or anything
like that. I know that he's competent
enough to do this. So, the first thing
that I do is instead of giving him a
breakdown of what I want to see, I'm
just going to ask him how he does it.
Because if he's doing it perfectly, I
don't change anything. I think I doubt
that. Let's see.
>> Let's go. Five. Give me five reps.
See what I mean? If someone's doing it
well, I don't really need to change
much. That was very good. That's all
right.
>> Small adjustment. Small adjustment. If
you guys have been watching me for long
enough, you'll know exactly what that
adjustment is. And that's the stance.
The stance, although it's not bad, I
would say
touch too wide.
>> Okay. Touch wide wide. Yeah.
So, the way that you were doing it, it's
kind of like
your feet are kind of being your legs
are kind of being posted outwards and it
causes your hands to go a little bit
wider than they need to. The most
efficient position for hands is where
the arms are straight down, right?
>> Straight down. So,
>> the fact is people go a little bit
wider. You know, I used to do jiu-jitsu.
Fun fact, about I think it was about 15
years ago. 15 years ago. Yeah, man. Time
flies. I used I used to tell people I
was about a decade ago, but then I
really thought about it. It's been 15
years. Anyway, anyway, 15 years ago, I
had a black belt.
>> I black belt. I had a blue belt. [__]
black belt. I'm going to tell everyone
that I'm a black belt, bj.
>> Prove me wrong, bro.
>> Um I had a blue belt. And a lot of the
principles that I use in the gym are
things that just made sense to me from
jiu-jitsu. Like having a strong base.
He's probably looking at me going,
"Don't teach me jiu-jitsu, bro." All
right. Having a strong base. So, like
having a wider base of support increases
your stability. And that's something
that I believe that a lot of people
think about with a deadlift is, you
know, a wider stance is a wider base of
it's a stronger base of support. It's
more stable. So, I can shift a heavier
load.
The fact is with a with a deadlift, you
don't need that much stability. You get
the stability you need with your feet at
hip width. Okay. The next thing is this.
Arms go on the outside of your legs. And
when your legs are wider, your arms have
to be wider. The further out your arms
go, the longer distance you must travel,
which is inefficient.
>> There's different variations of a
deadlift that I want you to
intentionally use a wider grip, which is
a snatch grip deadlift, different
exercise. But for a conventional
deadlift, that's the only change that I
want you to make. Let's go again.
>> Okay. So, this time I want you to stand
hipwidth. So your feet a little bit
closer pointing straight ahead. Okay. So
with the toe angle, that was a question
that someone asked me on my last videos.
Is it okay that we point the toes out? I
say it's kind of fine. I prefer straight
ahead. But the problem is if you point
the toes out, the knees must follow in
the same direction. And when the knees
push outwards, the arms have to go
outwards. So it's kind of inefficient.
So therefore, I like kind of straight
feet. I reckon that's perfect. Now with
your grip, it's straight down. Don't go
just too close for the sake of it. I
like we still need to factor in you're
you're going to be a strong dude just by
the fact that you're what weight class
are you?
>> About 100
>> 100 kilo guy. He throws around 100 kilo
people. Is that right? Is that accurate
to say?
>> Do you know what I mean? So like he'd be
pretty damn strong just naturally
without even having to lift a weight in
his life. The nature of his sport makes
him strong. So therefore, what I want to
do is assume that he should be able to
like from a this [__] floor
from a I I would say that a strength
standard of any highle jiu-jitsu player
should be a minimum of a two times body
weight deadlift. Oh, definitely. You
know, doesn't mean you have to do it
every time you come into the gym, but
I'd say that's the strength level that
you need to be. So factoring that in, we
still need to factor in how you're going
to hold on to the bar and look at the
grippy part. I would say optimal for
your hands is exactly where that line
is. Right. So, so your feet are hipwidth
apart. No, no. Outside, outside. So,
your whole hand is on the grip. Yeah.
>> Exactly. Exactly.
>> Okay.
>> Right. Now, let's do the exact same
thing again.
>> Good.
Just one more. Just one more.
Good. All right.
All right, really good. All right, let's
refine it even further. Let's refine it
even further.
>> Let's go.
>> So, you know what we might do? I might
get you to record from side view,
please, so that we can just see this. I
just want you to see the pattern that
we've got with how he gets his hips into
position. Like, it's pretty good,
but I think that we can make it a little
bit more precise. Watch what he does. He
He gradually lowers his hips, lowers his
hips, lowers his hips, and then he
drives as his hips are still moving.
Okay. So, we've got we're trying to hit
a bullseye from a moving target, right?
So, we've got things like a dynamic
start, which is where people go hips up,
hips down, drive, hips up, hips down,
drive, which is not a not a bad
technique.
>> But I consider that like um timing Conor
McGregor, timing beats speed, precision
beats power, right? So, it's hard to be
precise on a moving target. He's kind of
slowly getting his hips down and then
hitting as his hips are still moving.
which you can't guarantee your hips are
in the same position every single time.
And I would say my observation is your
hips are a little bit high on some of
those reps because you're trying to kind
of like attack it while you're still
moving.
>> What I want to see you do on the next
set is as you're lowering your hips, I
want you to come to a complete stop.
From that stop position, I want you to
think about stretching. So the stretch
that we consider is reach the crown of
your head towards the ceiling. So
stretch. That's how we take the slack
out of the bar. And then complete pause
>> and then push. So I want you to hit that
bullseye
>> from a dead stop.
>> Let's go.
>> Okay.
So let's have a look. Step a little bit
forward. Then I come forward. Good.
Let's have a look at the deadlift
breakdown step by step. How you guys
should do it at home. The first thing
here, look at his stance. Right. So I
brought him a little bit further
forward. What I'm looking for is that
barbell is in line with his midfoot. So
that's his base of support, right? And
that barbell will not leave the ground
unless under maximum loads unless it's
exactly at the center of his base of
support. If it's too far forward, it's
going to tip him forward and it's going
to be a much weaker position. So that's
where I like to start. The next thing I
consider is like how low am I looking
for for your hips to go. The moment your
shins gently touch that barbell, that's
when I say that's as deep as you should
go. Cuz if you go deeper than that,
you're going to push a barbell forward
away from your mid foot. All right,
let's do it again. Grab the bar. Sit in
position until your shins gently touch.
Think about reaching your crown of the
head towards the ceiling.
Now, what I want you to do is look at my
foot. There you go. Now, sit into
position. Let your shins gently touch.
Stretch. And then push the world away.
Nice. Keep your eyes on that spot. Keep
your eyes on that spot from start to
finish. Okay. So that means at the
bottom position,
give me two more. At the bottom
position, your neck is slightly
extended, but then at the top position,
your neck is slightly tucked. Okay.
Which finishes off your position nicely.
Good. And relax. Good.
>> Good. How's it feeling?
>> Yeah, it feels good.
>> Looking really nice. So from a technical
standpoint, if your deadlift look like
that, the like from his first set,
you're doing good. You know, I don't
want to sit there and say everything's
wrong. Like when I sit here when I sit
here and nitpick, it's like you people
at home are thinking, "Oh, look how
wrong his deadlift was to being." It
wasn't wrong. It was good. But what
we're doing is just fine tuning.
>> I'm in Sebastian Orbs World right now.
>> That's right. It's a little bit
different. Little bit different.
>> Okay. The next thing we're going to do,
let's have a drink, bro.
Do you have a Do you have a drink
bottle? When you deadlift, what do you
do with your grip? Do you like Right
now, you're warming up. You're doing
double overhand.
>> Uh, yeah. You just keep that or I'd go
like a hook grip.
>> You do hook grip?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> I just don't like doing that.
>> All right.
>> In my head, I'm like, "Oh, it's
>> Yeah, good. Good. Fine.
>> Okay. Let's talk a little bit about the
grip positions." Hook grip. If someone
comes to me and say, "I use hook grip."
I say, "Keep doing it." That's the
strongest grip that you can have. And
it's also the most symmetrical. Yeah,
that's the reason why I like it. Also a
low risk of injury. One of the main
injuries that people talk about is a
bicep tear. And that usually happens
with the supernated grip. And the reason
it happens is because when you
externally right when you supernate,
that increases tension on the bicep. And
it's usually that's the side that you
would tear the bicep
under two circumstances. If you're using
your bicep by bending your elbow and if
the weight's heavy enough. So a lot of
people aren't strong enough for it to
happen. So most of you wouldn't have to
worry. But either way, when you're using
the pronated grip, it decreases the risk
of bicep tears. And it's also a lot
stronger. It's also a lot stronger. It's
just more painful, which is why a lot of
people like myself don't actually do it.
So, how does it feel for you? Does it
hurt?
>> Uh, yeah. Eat it.
>> It's fine.
>> In my head, I'm thinking like
>> the other grip is just when I do it in
this fashion, I feel like my back is
radiating on like a diagonal. I'm like,
what is going on here? Cuz like half my
back, this side is like the lat the lat
is so activated
>> and this side's not. I'm coming up like
this at the top. One arm's like longer
than the other. Like, what am I doing?
>> Yeah. Okay. So, some people they feel
like the asymmetry is a thing. In my
opinion, if you're kind of like refined
with it, a lot of us powerlifters that
use mixed grip, they're quite
symmetrical when you do it, and it's not
a huge problem. Asymmetries, everyone
has them. Um, but either way, that's
good. Keep doing it. I'm not going to
change that. So, let's What weight would
you start with your uh grip?
>> Probably between like 120.
>> Okay, great. I'll tell you right now.
Here's a rule.
jiu-jitsu need grip strength, don't
they?
>> This is not a good grip exercise. All
right. So, a lot of people come in and
they'll say things like, which I thought
you were going to say because you're
doing a double overhand grip.
>> A lot of people say things like, "I need
a strong grip, so when I deadlift, I use
a double overhand um so that it improves
my grip." The problem with that is it
might be a decent grip exercise, but
that makes it a terrible back exercise
because now you're limited with how much
you can hold. We don't want that to be
the case. All right, let's have a look.
So, so let's have a look step by step of
what we're doing. Stance hip width,
barbell in line with his midfoot, arms
straight down on the outside of his
legs. That's the most efficient
position. Now, what he's going to do is
sit sit down, sit his hips, lower his
hips into position. Pull his armpits
towards his pelvis. So, put it pull it
towards the shins. Right?
That's going to activate his lats. From
here, I stand 3 m in front of him and I
say, "Look at my foot." So, his head
position is slightly extended here. And
I want you to reach the crown of your
head towards the ceiling. Take a big
breath to brace and push the world away.
Good. One more rep.
Sit into position.
Armpits. And then push the world away.
Good. And relax.
Good. As the weight's getting heavier,
this is when small things are happening.
This is what I love actually. It's the
whole idea of being explosive with the
deadlifts. I don't want you to be that.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So, a lot of people,
and that used to be me as well, I
learned from a guy called Andy Bolton. I
watch that was the first man to deadlift
1,000 pounds. And when he deadlifts,
he's got like um you know, he goes one
red plate at a time. And I'll give you a
demo of what he used to do. He'd um he'd
kind of go,
he would explode so heavily that the
barbell would fly off his thighs. And he
was so damn strong that he'd do that
with like five red plates aside. So 270
kg just flying off his thighs. And I
used to look at that and say,
>> "Looks epic.
>> Hell yeah, it looks epic. That's the
best deadlift in the world. Therefore,
that's how you must do it." Okay. But I
believe that that causes a lot of um bad
habits, right? When you try and be too
explosive. So that's what happened with
you is you went from the 60 kg to 80 kg.
It looked like you added a little bit
more explosion.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't want explosion. I want you to
consider slow is smooth, smooth is fast.
Okay? So, the smoothest way of doing it
is imagine the speed you would take to
stand up out of a chair.
>> Like you don't jump to get out of a
chair, you just stand. That's how I want
you to consider it. Okay? So, what you
did on that set then compared to the 60
is you're in position and then you went
>> Okay. You kind of your arms kind of went
>> to to get a bit of a runoff. I don't
want a runoff. I want tension. Tension.
Tension.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. I want you to go grab it. Stretch.
So eyes 3 m on the floor in front.
Stretch. So think about the barbell is
as if you're bending it, right? So
stretch and then stand.
>> Okay.
>> I see.
>> Let's do that again. I'm going to put an
object 3 m on the floor in front. And
that's your cue. Every time you do this
movement, you got to look at that
dumbbell.
>> Okay. All right. Sounds good.
>> Okay. Stance mid foot. Come bit closer
to the bar. Barbell over your midoot.
Good.
Grab the bar to the ceiling.
Armpits towards your pel first. Stretch
and stand.
See how smooth that was? That's a breath
of fresh air. Feel like I'm a Sebastian
or real.
>> Yeah, man. It's tension
man.
Did you hear that? Did you hear that?
The answer is no. You didn't hear that.
And that's the point. Very good. So
that's a key indicator that there's
tension taken out. What you hear if they
haven't is
>> So that click, you want to take it out.
So that's me taking the click out. And
then when you stand, you don't hear it.
>> Oh yeah.
>> Okay. So that's what I want to hear.
Nothing.
>> Like nothing. Like when you do your
jiu-jitsu sparring,
>> you don't want to hear anything.
>> Okay.
>> It's all coming back now.
>> Exactly.
>> We're going full circle.
>> Exactly. Okay. Next up, we're going to
go 100 kilos. So you may have heard me
say the cue, pull your armpits towards
the pelvis.
What is that? It's something that Seb's
already doing well, but I want to
explain to you exactly what it is.
Pulling the armpits towards the pelvis
does a couple of great things. One, this
action is an action of the lats. It's
called shoulder joint extension. So,
it's a cue that I use.
It's a cue that I use to get the lifter
to activate their lats.
Okay. The lats.
Stand over here, please, brother. Just
here. Sit here. The lats attach to the
front of the shoulder here and they come
underneath and attach to the top of the
pelvis. So look at the distance that
that lat crosses. It's the longest it
crosses the longest distance of the
spine of all of our core muscles. So
what are the core muscles? We've got
erectus spine a which a lot of people
think they're the main contributors of
stabilizing the spine but actually
they're kind of segmental. They cross a
couple of vertebra but they don't cross
that exact same distance of the lats.
The lats cross the longest distance.
Therefore, they're the most responsible
for maintaining a rigid torso. So, if
you want to have, you know, a spine that
picks up that weight like a crane and
not a fishing rod, that's the number one
cue is armpits towards the pelvis. So,
that's how we engage the lats. The next
thing it does, there's a big habit that
a lot of people have with their
deadlifts that don't use their lats. So,
I can tell if you're not using your lats
by if the bar drifts away from your
body. It's not happening now, but I want
to make sure it never happens. And
that's why I say another cue, armpits
towards the pelvis or pull the bar in
towards your shins. So, that's a great
cue to keep the lats on and keep the
barbell in line with the midoot. So, if
the lats turn off, one, weak back and
two, it's now no longer in line with the
center of base of support. So,
therefore, it's weaker. You don't have
muscle supporting. And this is how we
increase the risk of low back injury.
Step by step. So stance his hip width,
barbell in line with his midoot,
grabbing the bar on the outside of his
legs. One small change. There's so many
small changes.
>> When you're bending your knees, they're
kind of coming in a little bit. I want
you to think about opening your hips.
>> The way I teach people to open the hips
is thinking about pushing your arms
gently against the inside of their arms.
So it doesn't mean push your arms
outwards. I never want you to do that. I
just never want the knees to knock in.
All right? So opening the hips by
thinking about the thigh gently touching
the arm.
Usually when people do this, it allows
them to feel a better leg drive. So sit
into position,
knees out against the arms, push them
outwards. Good. Armp pull the bar into
your shins. Head towards the ceiling,
looking at that dumbbell, and push the
world away.
The technician. Look at this guy. He's a
technician
>> pushing it out.
Sit. Knees out. Knees out. Stretch.
Ah. One more. Just one more.
Knees out.
Stretch.
Nice. Real nice. Nice.
>> Very good. Okay. How's it feeling?
>> It's coming together.
>> Great. Now, what I wouldn't mind doing,
I want to play around with a few things.
I want you to try the belt.
>> Let's go.
>> Okay. So the belt isn't uh necessary all
the time. In fact, a lot of people say
things like, "You don't wear a belt on
the playing field." So therefore, why
should you wear a belt in the gym? Well,
I'll tell you why. Because the objective
of training in the gym is to get the
most out of this stuff. The last thing I
want to do is try and replicate what he
needs to do in his sport.
Okay? in his sport,
he does eight sessions of that per week.
I don't need for him to come into the
gym room when we have the opportunity to
add to that and try and replicate
exactly what he's already doing. Okay,
so obviously belt is just one small
facet of it. There's a lot of things
that I want to talk to you guys about as
well, and that is the position of his
spine that I want him to maintain and
learn how to maintain to have a better
carryover to his sport. And that
position is kind of like rigid neutral.
All right. So, let's talk about how
we're going to work the belt
>> for a deadlift. I don't like to have it
too tight. So, here's something I want
you to try. Let's go higher. Higher.
Higher. Higher. Under your There we go.
>> There we go.
>> All righty.
>> Okay. Now, from here, that's not that's
not tight. Ah, that's too loose.
>> One more in.
I'm getting leaner. Okay. Now, from
here, take a big breath and push into
it. Ah, perfect. Perfect. Okay, good.
So, with a deadlift, I like it here
because it kind of like when people bend
over in a deadlift, when the belt's too
low, it pinches the fat here or if it's
too low or if it's a little bit too
high, it digs into the ribs.
>> So, what I like to do with this high
belt position is have it over the top of
the ribs.
>> Y,
>> right? So, it's not digging in anything.
So, from here, what I want you to do,
take So, get in the deadlift stance.
Don't worry about the bar. Don't worry
about the bar.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Get in deadlift stance. Take a big
breath and then bend over. Is it digging
in or anything? No.
>> Okay, perfect. Let's go. What I want you
to do is just one rep. Now, we're going
to do singles now. Working our way up.
>> Okay, so stance, hip width, barbell in
line with the midoot, grabbing the
barbell with the arm straight down,
>> sitting into position.
>> Do you want to take the breath now or at
the bottom?
>> Yeah, take a breath now and hold it and
hold it the whole time. Sit it. Knees
out. Head to ceiling. Knees out. Head to
ceiling. Pull the bar into your shins.
Push the world away. Beautiful. And
relax.
>> Yeah. All righty.
>> Real nice.
>> That's cool. Real nice.
>> And it feels like usually I have the bar
the belt like really tight.
>> Yeah.
>> That time I felt like I was just
touching it, you know.
>> Perfect. Perfect. So that's the thing.
So you got two choices with the with a
belt for a deadlift. A lot of people
say, and this might be you at home, that
they hate using a belt in a deadlift.
And that's usually the solution is the
high belt position because people like
me, people hate using a belt with the
deadlifts. I don't know if you followed
me for long enough to see my famous belt
throw. This is when I learned about
this. I had the belt too tight. Then I
had it really tight. I missed the lift
through the belt, broke the belt, and
then I had to use one of these prong
belts. It was a lever, and it was the
same lever, the same tightness that I
would use for my squat, which is quite
tight. And then I didn't have access to
that because I'd broken the lever when I
when I set the belt. And so I used a
different belt with a prong which was
looser. And then I got the deadlift
straight after. It's like, oh, maybe
tighter isn't better when it comes to uh
belt tightness for a deadlift. For a
squat,
>> you know, with a heavy squat. I like the
the tightness of a belt.
>> But with a deadlift, a lot of people
find a lot of comfort when they go a
little bit looser.
>> And you probably will, too. I sit it
there to relax. It's loose.
>> And then you just pull up. Then then
when I'm ready to go, suck my guts in,
pull it up over the ribs, and then it's
on.
>> I see. Interesting. Okay.
>> That's That's how I um that's my little
trick
>> with my equipment.
>> Right. Nice.
>> Sleep with his belt.
>> I sleep with my belt. I sleep with my
wrist wraps. Nah, not really.
>> You know, there's a topic about spine
care and spine strengthening. Um and a
lot of people that I know that do sports
where it's unpredictable movement
patterns. So, Brazilian jiu-jitsu,
it's not just fighting. Like, fighting
is a lot of stand up as well, but
Brazilian jiu-jitsu, I would say, of all
of the sports, you probably get your
spine in the most contorted positions of
everything.
>> It's so bendy.
>> So bendy in every direction, right? So,
so max flexion, rotation,
>> yeah,
>> like lateral flexion as well, every
angle. So, here's a mistake that I think
a lot of people make is they try and
replicate that in the gym and they go,
"All right, I'm bending my spine so much
in jiu-jitsu. I want to be strong in
those positions." So, therefore, I'm
going to choose exercises that
strengthen those positions. And they
replicate max range flexion. And I'll
tell you an exercise that I know that a
lot of people love and it's probably
going to upset a lot of people is a
Jefferson curl. So, Jefferson curl I
would consider more of a like bit of a
stretch exercise. It's kind of like
loaded where you you intentionally flex
your spine maximally under load. Now,
here's the thing. People are treating
those types of exercises like it's the
intention is to build strength on the
discs of the spine.
>> The problem is understanding what the
discs are. They're not contractile
tissue. They don't generate force and
they don't hypertrophy the same way that
a muscle would. So when you are spending
eight to 10 sessions per week in those
positions,
it kind of becomes redundant to come
into the gym and try and do it more.
Right? What I would prefer to do is kind
of manage
the exposure to flexion load and keep it
on the mats. Is that what you call it?
In power lifting, we say keep it on the
platform. So keep it on the mats,
>> right? You you keep that stuff on the
mats. Don't bring it into the gym space
where the objective is to not streng my
I don't want to stren try and strengthen
your discs. I want to strengthen the
muscles that move your spine. And the
way to do that again start with the
conventional deadlift. All right.
>> You ready, brother?
>> Let's put it up.
>> We're just going to do singles now.
Okay. So remember, slow is smooth,
smooth is fast. Okay.
All right.
>> Okay. Walk up to the bar in your
hipwidth stance.
Sitting into position,
bending the knees until the shins gently
touch the barbell.
Big breath. Push the knees out. Push the
knees out. Hit the ceiling. Push the
world away. Good. And relax.
Okay. Good.
Flying up.
>> Yeah, it feels good.
It looks like almost perfect.
>> Yeah.
>> So, you lost the whole taking the slack
out thing.
>> Yeah. Yeah. When I left it, I was like,
"Oh,
>> yeah." So, so I want you to So, what we
did with Seb was he was kind of like,
you know, momentum is a nice thing. And,
and you know, that's the problem with
the deadlift is we're starting from a
dead stop. A squat, a bench press, we
start from the eccentric portion. This
is how we build momentum. Eccentric to a
concentric. We get that stretch reflex.
Squat, eccentric to a concentric
deadlift. We're starting from nothing to
a concentric. So, we don't have the
momentum to begin the movement. So, we
try to build that momentum by doing
things like dynamic start or, you know,
sitting the hips in and then and then
hitting.
The problem with that, well, my problem
with that is a lot of the times, not all
the time, some people are very good at
that. A lot of the times, you lose that
precision. So, what I'm after here and
what I've changed with Seb, instead of
him gradually sitting in and then
lifting, I'm telling him to stop here.
But then there's one more step. Stop.
Stretch.
>> Okay. The way that we stretch head
towards the ceiling.
>> Okay. So from here, try and touch
>> that part of your head to the ceiling.
So from here, stretch. And you should
that's when you take that noise out of
the bar. Boom.
>> And that's when you'll feel a stretch on
your arms.
>> Gotcha.
>> Okay. And that's when we that's when the
next cue is push, not pull. All right.
So deadlift, of course, there's pull
involved and you can't avoid that, but
you can avoid pushing. I'll tell you how
to deadlift without pushing. It's called
a stifflegged deadlift. So this is this
is me deadlifting without a push. So
that's just pure pull. Does that make
sense? I've got no choice but to pull.
So therefore, I don't need to queue the
lifter to pull. He's got no choice.
>> But you do have to queue push. So that's
why I want the focus to be on the push
component, not the pull. Right.
>> What's your normal split when you train
weights?
>> Usually it's full body. Like my whole
goal usually with my lifting is that I
don't want to be too tired and too
injured for my training sessions.
>> So back when I was doing like more of a
split type uh session, if I did legs, it
would be like so intense cuz I was
trying to do all my leg sessions in one
day
>> that I would lose my ability because I
like the main thing that ruins me in
jiu-jitsu.
>> And that's I I like to lift before
jiu-jitsu because
>> I don't actually care about being too
strong at the training session because
I'm not I'm not trying to maximally load
myself anyway. Yeah,
>> but what is the lack of mobility I have
>> from stretching so much in the weight
session. So my usually my goal is to
>> get to the session as fresh as possible
and wake up the next day with
>> at least not doms that are forcing me to
not be able to contract very well cuz
the main contractions I'm usually
looking for is like I want to be able to
pull my knees to my chest. So my abs
need to really be able to
>> flex in an explosive way and also like
hold
>> Yeah.
>> isometrically and also my hamstrings.
So, I usually want to make sure my
hamstrings feel fine the next day. So,
that's why I think the split
>> having a whole body allows you to have
less total sets per workout.
>> Yeah.
>> So, less muscle soreness on every
muscle.
>> That's right.
>> So, it's allows for a much better
recovery for your sessions.
>> Pretty smart. And, you know, for me and
my sessions, I would have never taken
him to his limits anyway. On the first
session, I'll always start conservative.
But either way, it's all the more reason
to understand that this session, the
objective here is for this to not
interfere with the work that you're
going to train this afternoon twice.
>> The objective is for this to not
interfere with his training session. So,
I need him to not be completely
exhausted, but two, I don't want to wear
his muscles down so he loses mobility to
be able to achieve the positions that he
needs.
>> What did you just say? You're going to
have your knees on your chest kind of
thing. Like, that's the max range of
flexion you have. The last thing I want
to do is interfere with that. All right.
So, what we're going to do today is I'm
monitoring the bar speed. If it starts
slowing down and looking grindy, I've
I've kind of I've gone further than
where I wanted to. So, I want it to be
>> kind of fast. Don't misinterpret when I
say fast. I don't want you to
intentionally go explosive like what I
was talking about. I still want it to be
smooth.
>> But if you start grinding, that's the
that's the wrong thing. All right. Got
it.
>> So, let's do it again. Okay. So, we got
140 kg just the single.
So, we'll get this higher. I'll see how
the normal grip feels. And I'll probably
go mix the hook grip on the next one.
>> Yep.
Stretch. Get slack out. Stand. Yeah.
Beautiful.
>> That seems better.
>> Real clean.
>> That was like a clean one. That was like
>> it's just precise now.
>> Yeah. I feel like I was on one of your
reels then.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. One of those girls you got
perfectly doing.
>> Maybe we can make him one of the
textbook technique next time.
>> Smashing good the good books.
>> Yeah.
>> Not the bad examples in there.
>> Imagine that. He comes on sees my
Instagram page what not to do and I got
this guy's videos
idiot that
>> Oh my goodness.
>> Oh man. I actually have an idea. I just
thought an idea. Tell me.
>> That's actually funny.
I just thought, you remember that video
you sent me and it was like pretending
he's reacting.
>> Yes.
>> We could do this. We could do like
you're doing the reaction, I'm
deadlifting and you'd be like, "This is
why these you guys suck." So you're
working now.
>> Yeah. Now it's like I'm feeling like
it's actually awake.
>> Yeah. So I don't want to now go in 20
kilo jumps
>> slowly. Slowly. All right. So you
catching that? So get this right. So,
like I said, it's not outrageous for me
to expect that Seb can do a double body
weight deadlift. It doesn't mean I need
to get him there today. Like, this is
the first time I've deadlifted with him.
You know, the last thing I want to do is
hurt this guy. That guy could beat me in
a fight really, really easily, right?
You know what I'm saying? So, the
objective
is, but even if that wasn't the case,
which is not the case, I'm only mucking
around. Um,
I don't need to test his max on the
first day. In fact, that's a pretty
unintelligent way of training is testing
someone's max on the first day. The
first day is testing, but not max
testing. I want to leave repetitions in
reserve. Now, I did notice it was still
easy, but I noticed that now he has to
think about it that 140 kg isn't just
like, you know, like an effortless
weight. He needs to put in a little bit
of effort. So, what I'm doing now is I'm
slowing down the incremental increases.
So, 150 kg. Now, some of you may be
thinking things like, "Oh, that's too
small a jump. You got to do so many
different jumps to get to the top
weight. It's fatiguing. It's not
fatiguing. It's stimulating. If you
noticed after, you know, 80 kg, when we
got to, I think it was 100 kg, we
started just doing singles. So, it's one
rep. Like, I'm talking to Seb a lot as
we're training. And it's not because I
love a chat. It might seem that way, but
it's intentionally. I like to give him
about 5 minutes rest between sets,
especially as we get to these points.
>> Yeah. You know, when it comes to things
like a deadlift, it's highly complex.
And this is one of the exercises. Every
single exercise comes with a slightly
different profile. So, you got exercises
like a lat pull down or a bicep curl or
hamstring curl. I would recommend, you
know, two to three minutes rest in
between sets. Totally fine. But when it
comes to a deadlift that's highly
complex, the objective isn't to have you
grinding out reps. It isn't to have you
performing your movements in a
non-reovered state. So, I want him fully
recovered, which is another reason why
I'm talking during the session. So, he
doesn't just sit down. A lot of people
when they say 5 minute rest, they say,
"How boring must training be?" Well,
that's what it is. If you want to do it
the right way, you need to actually get
a full recovery. And it's not just when
your muscles are ready. It takes longer
for the nervous system to be ready. And
you don't actually feel when that's the
case. So, a lot of people that play it
by feel, they might say things like, you
know, after 3 minutes, I'm ready. It's
like, well, I've done this for so many
years that I've noticed when someone
does a a top set of a complex movement
like a deadlift and they only rest 3
minutes or 4 minutes, their performance
declines and I don't want that to
happen. Okay, so the idea here, small
incremental increases, it's not
fatiguing. This is called stimulate, not
annihilate. So, actually, um, when you
do it right, it makes the next set even
better. All right, let's go. 150 kg, one
rep. Everything is about smooth.
Okay, we got the hook grip now.
Let's get it smooth as
armpits stretch. Head to ceiling. Push
the world away. Ah, even better.
Yeah, that was a clean one. Even better.
>> Yeah. Nice, bro. Good. Take a sip.
Nice. So the things that I'm looking for
to make it like when I say even better,
it's just like the hips and the
shoulders rise at the same time. So a
lot of the times you might see people
when they're doing, you know, heavier
heavier deadlifts, the hips start going,
the hips rise first and then the
shoulders come up. And you know, there's
many reasons why that might happen, but
that didn't happen here. A lot of times
it happens. It's a positional thing. So
there's there's probably two reasons why
that happens. When someone's hips rise
too early, two main reasons. one, they
might be squatting too deep and the
barbell's away from their midoot. So,
what happens then is like you go like
this. You go you squat really, really
deep. See how I rolled the barbell
forward and the bar is not going to
leave the ground unless it's in line
with my midoot. So, to to get that to
happen, I need to go lift the hips up to
get my shins out of the way before the
bar comes off the ground. So, therefore,
the hips rise early. So, that's a
positional reason. The next reason it
might happen is when people think too
much about the pull component, not the
push component. So, as I suggested,
you've got no choice. You're going to
pull, but you do have a choice whether
or not you push. So, when people's hips
rise early, that's when I'd really
double down on the queue. Push the world
away. So, you lock yourself in position.
You're locked in. You stop moving, you
stretch, you take the slack out of the
bar, and then drive those legs through
the ground like it's a leg press. All
right, we go up again. 160. And my lats
are getting a pump now, so it's getting
hard to get this up there.
>> You're feeling it, huh? Got a pump in
the lats, guys. Big big jacked big jack
jiu-jitsu fighter.
>> Big black belt, right? Yeah, man.
>> Yeah. Nice.
>> This is my black belt right here.
>> Okay. Stance hip width. Hands on the
line.
Barbell in line with midoot. Take a big
breath to brace.
sits his hips in position until his
shins gently touch the bar. Head to
ceiling. Stretch. Beautiful.
>> Nice.
>> Real nice.
>> Real nice. Good.
>> Get the slack out of it right away.
>> Yeah. I think that um
couple more sets. I don't want to max
you out. I don't want to do anything.
But I think at the very least we can hit
180 for a single today.
>> Yeah, I see that.
>> Before we then go on to some
accessories. These are still like I want
you to drive them out.
>> Actually, you know what? I think I did
forget that Q. Yeah.
>> It's still like the way that you are.
And I'd say that it's a habit. It's like
cuz you're naturally with a wider stance
>> that your knees are always inside your
feet. So, it's kind of like a normal
thing for you to have the knees kind of
inside the feet like that.
>> So,
>> so that's probably something that you
need to be reminded of. And and you
know, when people hear me say knees out,
it's like no, I don't want knees out. I
want it stacked. I want hip, knee, foot
in a straight line, right? But on that
last when the knees aren't doing that,
that's what it that's what it is. It's
not a straight line. That's a stronger
structure. Straight down.
>> So, I don't need it pushing your arms
out. Your arms are going to be long and
and and hanging.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> All right. Let's switch on.
>> Yeah. Like this is like the point where
like I have to remember the cues or else
I'm just going to rip it up.
>> No ripping. So, this is the this is the
idea of not taking big jumps with your
weights. I'm only having gradual jumps
so that you don't have to think about
aggression. I don't want aggression.
>> Okay, let's go. barbell in line with the
mid foot. Grabbing the bar on the lines.
Take a big breath from the top.
Sit in position. Knees out. Head to
ceiling. Head to ceiling. Stretch. Drive
the wall away. Beautiful. Yeah. Nice.
>> Nice.
>> Real nice. We're going to do one more
set. Okay.
>> Sounds good.
>> Just one more set on a 180 before we
then go on to some accessories. Now,
let's talk a little bit about
accessories.
Me as a powerlifter on a deadlift day,
I'm going to be thinking about exercises
that I'm going to use to complement my
deadlift. So, the rules are usually main
movement is is the highest priority to
achieving your goal. So, as a
powerlifter, I have four days. One is a
squat focused day, one is a deadlift
focused day, one is a bench press focus.
Actually, two are bench press focus
days, upper body push pull, right? Where
the main focus is those main movements.
And then what we want to do on our
accessories is not try and do more of
the same thing. We want to say okay we
trained everything we needed to train
with the main movement. Now what did we
neglect by doing that main movement? So
when we could think about like a
deadlift as a powerlifter I think about
the muscles that are involved. So the
main muscles involved in a deadlift is
kind of like posterior chain. So glutes
you know hamstrings erectus spina. So a
lot of people go okay cool that's a
deadlift. You know what's what's another
exercise for a posterior chain? We got
good mornings, we've got RDL's. It's
like, well, you kind of done that
already. So, it kind of makes it a
little bit redundant. The fact is the
deadlift trains the glutes, but in a
specific way, which is like in the most
lengthened position. So, the glutes are
extensors, right? So, this is the bottom
of a deadlift. The glutes are the most
lengthened position. So, to go and do
more glute exercises where the glutes
are in a lengthened position, it's like,
well, you've already kind of done that.
So the objective is to choose a an
exercise that hits the glutes in a
different length position or a different
contractile position, which is usually
my favorite exercise to complement with
that is like hip thrusts, which probably
pretty good exercise for a jiu-jitsu
fighter. Do you do hip thrusts? Ah,
yeah. Great. And and back extensions. So
like 90° or 45°ree back extensions.
That's what I would do. But he's a
jiu-jitsu fighter and I don't want him
to smash the hell out of his glutes and
hamstrings right now. He's probably
going to do glutes and hamstrings
another day this week.
>> Yeah.
>> So, we don't that's that's what I would
tell you to do on another day is hit the
glutes on your second glute day. Hit the
glutes in a shortened position.
>> Right. But for now, what I would
consider is
>> is let's not hit the lower body after
this. Let's just do some upper body
exercises after this last one. Let's go.
So, I was just asking Seb if he trains
some music and he says, "Yeah,
headphones or whatever it is." Now,
something about training and head space
and arousal. I've actually done a whole
YouTube video on this talking about, you
know, head space and psyching up. I
don't want him psyching up for these
lifts. So that's one sure way of not
taking yourself to the point where it's
going to be so fatiguing for the next
sessions is don't change to that point
of the neural the heightened neural
arousal that it's going to interfere
with fatigue and recovery.
>> So right now this is an education
session. This is a technique session
only. I don't want to scream at him,
slap his back. He'll probably slap me
back. I don't want to get him to the
point where he needs to really really
push down. I'd rather him come to this
deadlift and a different mindset. I want
him to come and think about his body
position. And that's a way of kind of
like not exerting maximal force. Okay?
So that's another thought process when
you're teaching an exercise.
Lose the psych up.
Okay. We don't need the psych up. We
need technique. All right. So that's
what we want to hear. We want to hear
nothing.
>> Yeah. I think it's hate better.
Especially when I'm learning something
new.
>> Yeah.
>> Even when I'm drilling in jiu-jitsu, I
definitely don't want to listen to like
music. I hate when there's just loud
music playing
>> or even when I'm rolling, I'm sparring
and the music's going crazy.
>> It's like, why am I freaking sending it
right now?
>> The freaking Drake's going off in the
background.
>> Why am I so damn angry?
>> The freaking Travis Travis Scott concert
right now in the background, you know?
Like I prefer that's why when I train
with John Dan, it was always no music in
the training session and like I feel
like that's when I was able to think and
like really develop skills faster cuz I
was just And it's exact same thing right
now like I'm doing one.
>> Did you say you were training with
>> John Dan? Yeah,
>> that's that's a big name in jiu-jitsu,
isn't it? I'm I'm not in the scene. So
anyone who's in the scene, that's one of
his coaches, right?
>> Yeah. He's the best coach, man ever.
Like just the sessions like training
with him just taught me so much not only
about jiu-jitsu, but just how to
actually learn
>> how to be a good student, how to be
serious because I think these are skills
that unless you go and like you surround
yourself with the like high stuff
people, as you know, you were with those
Lily Bridge people, like the best
lifters, you learn like these cues, not
only how to do it, but they also show
you how they learn how to do it.
>> Yeah.
>> Through teaching it. So with John
Danaher, no music in his sessions.
>> Yeah. and then finishing the session
like maximum focus like just locked in
at all times like the entire session.
>> Is there an aggression thing or
minimizing the aggression?
>> Yeah, minimize aggression of course. I
mean you you get to like a point where
like you start preparing for
competitions
>> and you're going to of course increase
it cuz you want to feel good. And the
whole goal with getting some competition
I'm sure you know with these guys is
just make sure they believe they can
actually lift the weight. And for me
it's to believe that I can't lose.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And the only way to believe that
is to freaking smash everyone in the
train station. But to get to that point,
I need to have developed the skills
>> where when I actually want to do that,
I'm not just being delusional. I'm
actually apply I'm actually able to bash
them in training.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, so
>> so like Okay, I was just telling Seb
before I was watching a few videos of
his highlights when he gets into his
fights.
>> He's pretty aggressive.
>> So you're shaking your head, you're
getting your head involved. That's why
he's got those ears on him as well.
>> Yeah, the big ones,
>> right? The the cauliflower ears. It's
just so
>> drain them so many times. They would be
they would be crazy. so much aggression
with with your game in particular. So,
I've seen people that don't train that
hard.
>> What's what's it like with John when you
do it like that? Um, I mean there's
always going to be like specific times
in training where I need to like sort of
exert myself in that passion to make
something apply or maybe maybe I want to
see how the move gets applied if I
>> add aggression.
>> Add a bit of aggression to the technique
>> or I have a training partner who's
bigger and stronger and maybe they're
pushing it
>> cuz of course like I can only monitor
how I react, how I act in a training
session, but sometimes you come across
someone who's
>> a bit of a head and they're coming in
there going crazy and like what am I
going to let them bash me? Like no way
>> like okay fine I'm going to
>> So So if you're sparring with John
Danaher there
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Would he be fine with you just ramping
up the aggression if he needs?
>> Yeah, of course. I mean like there like
band techniques, no flying body weight,
none of this crap.
>> But
>> like of course if someone comes in, they
want to like have a bit like show off
who's boss like I have to show them
before.
>> I have to step up. Yeah, exactly. And if
I
>> if I get smashed then it's not going to
look good.
>> Okay, now let's So although I do want no
aggression, I do want your head to be
ready for this. Okay, so let's um You
got chalk on your hands?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. I want full focus now. 180. I
believe this is submaximal for you. I
believe it's heavy, but it's submaximal.
Okay? So, I want it to look submaximal.
Okay? So, no grinding. I want perfect
precision. And if it's precise like how
you've been doing, it's it's going to
come up easy. So, let's do this. Stance
hip width. Barbell in line with midoot.
Arms straight down. Long and relaxed
arms.
Sit into position with knees out.
Brace.
Knees out. Pull the bar into your body.
Head to ceiling. Squeeze that weight up.
Nice. Real nice. Smooth, man.
>> Yeah, bro.
>> Sweet.
>> Smooth.
>> Hectic.
>> Good job, bro. Good job. Okay,
180. Yeah, I would say that I was pretty
right by saying 200 kg is where you'd
be.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> No problem. I think even more than 200,
which we don't need to get to. So this
is whenever I'm doing my testing, I kind
of get to a point where it's like that's
a good enough indication for me to say
he's probably at about 200 kg. So if I
was to write a program for that, I'd
base that on like, you know, a 200 kilo
max. Um, but then I still don't need to
test your max. That's enough for me to
see, you know, what your upper limit is.
Now, here's the fact of it. One rep max
or one reps, one rep, that wasn't a run,
one rep max. It was a heavy single.
isn't the best way of building strength.
It's the best way of refining technique
and teaching the body how to shift a
heavy load, but it's not the best way of
building muscle and it's not the best
way of building strength. You need some
volume to be able to do it. And this is
where I like a method like a top set,
back down set. So that top single is
kind of like technique, teaching the
body how to handle a heavy load. But now
I do want to do a little bit of back
down work. So something that I like to
do here is I'd get 80% of what we just
did. I'll get the calculator out in a
moment. Are you good with maths? 80% of
that. Yeah.
>> Was that 180?
>> I say 18 * 8.
>> What is it? 144. Well, that's what we're
going to do. But we're going to do 145
must cuz we're overachievers.
>> Yeah. Yeah, that's right.
>> 80. How what percent is 145?
>> That's probably 80 something.
>> All right, let's go. You know what we
did last time? We did this whole
percentage thing, a math thing. We go,
"It's this." And we're like, "Oh, WE GOT
IT. HIGH FIVE." AND THEN AND then at the
end of it, he goes, "It was actually
really wrong." I'M LIKE, "NO WAY. WE'RE
FULL acting like we're we're smart.8 *
140 180
>> 144 must
not just a pretty face. He's got he's
got genius.
>> Not just a pretty face. All right, we're
going to go. So that's what we're going
to do. Um so why 80%? So let's talk a
little bit about the science. Let's add
a little bit of that in. If you want to
build strength, a lot of the research
points towards lifting weights kind of
like 80% and up of your max. So when it
comes to building muscle, the
percentages don't matter as much.
Proximity to failure is what is more
important. So you can build muscle on
five reps, 10 reps, 15 reps, 20 reps. As
long as you take the movement to a close
proximity to failure. What you want to
do is achieve mechanical tension. It
doesn't just mean do 10 reps and you
build muscle. It's got to be 10 reps
where the last couple of reps are
really, really, really hard and working
towards failure. That's how you build
muscle. But when it comes to strength,
it's not the same thing. You don't
really want to, you know, focus on
training to failure when it comes to
strength building. Actually, in fact,
there's a lot of research that supports
leaving more repetitions in reserve so
that the bar speed is a little bit
faster, and the technique is a little
bit cleaner, is more of an advantage
when it comes to top end strength
development. So, this is what you're
going to see right now. So, 80%. So that
was his um the heavy that's not his max.
That was the heaviest weight that we're
doing today. We're now going to do a
couple of So normally one of my favorite
protocols top set and then three by
three. But because uh he's uh training a
lot, he's doing a lot of sessions, we
might just do two by two sets of three.
What are your thoughts on that? Fine.
>> Yeah, that makes sense.
>> Okay, so two top single and then two by
three. This is our strength session. So,
I don't know what he's got planned for
the rest of his program, but if I was to
write a program for him, I'd say, "Let's
start this week one top single on 180
and then two sets of three on 80% of
that." So, let's just call it 145. And
then I'd say for the next 3 weeks, you
could really logically just add 5 kilos
to each of those.
>> So, next week 185 and then 150 for 3x3
2x3 and then the next week 190
>> and then 155 and the next week 195
>> I think.
>> Or you can do it for 5 weeks. So end on
>> with a clean number at the end.
>> Exactly. I don't like to finish on 195.
It's stupid.
>> It's stupid. It doesn't make sense. Good
man.
>> I can never on the same page. All right.
Now, these three reps. Wait up a second,
please, brother.
>> It's perfection. It's not about feeling
the burn. It's not about grind out. I
want the third rep to look like you got
plenty of reps in reserve. Yeah. Okay.
Let's do it. Technique. Technique.
Technique. Knees
out. Pull into your body. Eyes up.
Good.
Set.
Nice. One more.
Beautiful.
Good job. How sweet. Good job, bro. Take
a seat. 5 minutes rest and we do one
more set. Allow. Bring your chest up
high. And then now push. Let's go. Don't
punch. Good. Control stretch. Now,
something that you're doing is you're
shrugging a lot. I I notice that about
your posture in general.
>> You're very much like that. It's
probably a jiu-jitsu thing.
>> Spend all day doing that.
>> Yeah. So, when the when your shoulders
are elevated, it's the opposite of lat
recruitment. Lats is the press,
>> right? So, we want the lats to be active
just to stabilize the joint. Right.
Good. And so, that's something that I'm
looking for. If that if that's something
you're doing, if it's a habit that
you're doing is shrugging, stop doing
that. I want the shoulder girdle to be
down. So, so check this out. Seb
actually had a competition yesterday.
And during a competition, he doesn't
know exactly what he did, but he came
out and he felt that his pec was
slightly strained. So, what we're doing
now is a little bit of rehab work. One
of the my favorite ways to rehab. How's
that feeling? Fine.
>> Great.
>> Great. Great. Hand drop. One of my
favorite ways to to rehab a muscle.
Comfortable. Is not to ignore it. Is not
to let it completely recover. Unless, of
course, it's a complete rupture, which I
know that it's not. He wouldn't have
been able to do these exercises if it
was a complete rupture. So if it's a
minor tear, so you know that's quite a
common thing that people have minor
tears and you get a little bit of muscle
soreness and people just say it's
nothing. Like that's what a strain is.
And the best way for me in my history of
powerlifting, watch out, you're going to
trip over something. Um to allow for
recovery is to train it in immediately.
Okay? So the way that I train it and
here's a trick that I have with all
muscles where if it's a m like less than
you know grade one tear type of thing
which is I'd say his is probably not
even that is to put as much blood
through the muscle as possible with
light loads. So the rep scheme that I
like to have is direct work for three
sets of 20. So it's like really really
high rep with a weight that causes zero
pain. So maybe slight discomfort. I'm
sure if he has a a slightly strained
pec, it'll probably be sore just doing
nothing. Um, so slight discomfort is
kind of just going to happen. But if it
increases the pain, that's an indication
that you've gone too heavy. So that's
something that I want to introduce to
Seb right now. I want him to try and
just see what we can do. And this is
also something that I've noticed that
I've injured myself before and they
think, damn it, you know, like as an
athlete, damn it, I'm injured. I'm not
going to be able to train or do whatever
it is. A lot of the times people come to
me and they say, "I've injured myself.
What should I do?" You want to get back
into the game as soon as possible. Me as
a powerlifter, but also Seb as a
jiu-jitsu fighter. He wants to have the
confidence to know that he can get back
into training as soon as possible.
When's your next competition?
>> I like to try and compete cuz I want as
many reps as possible. It's not like I'm
getting hit in the head. So, as long as
my body's fresh, I would compete every
weekend if I could.
>> Yeah. Okay. So, if you came into this
weekend's comp, if you had a comp this
weekend and you came in with a pec tear,
what would you think? Would you not
compete? I mean, I'd probably not want
to do the competition. That's why we're
working on making sure that it doesn't
hurt by the by the time that comes. Just
want to be primed every time. Every
weekend need to be primed.
>> So, two amazing things. One is it
increases the hell out of blood flow.
So, the way that we do it is three sets
of 20 reps with a very, very light
weight. And actually, every day, so he
doesn't live in a gym. When I did it for
my pec tears, I lived in a gym and every
day I'd walk in and I'd do three sets of
20 of a light weight and then I
gradually go heavier every single day.
So with him, I don't know if he's got
access to a gym every single day.
>> It's like next door.
>> You do? Okay. Fantastic. Well, that's
what I would recommend, but we're going
to have a play around with it today. And
what we're going to be doing, this is
his upper body session. So, we did
deadlifts at the start of the session,
and we're just going to do an upper body
push pull. So, coming straight into a
lat pull down. So, this is, you know,
one of my favorite ways of training
upper body is super seting the push and
the pull together. So, just give me
eight reps um with a reverse grip. So,
this way here. Yep.
So, choices of exercises here. It's a
very common thought and I used to do
this as well.
Full stretch. Good.
It's a very common thought and I used to
do this as well is think about, you
know, like the demands of a jiu-jitsu
athlete. He doesn't compete with a ghee.
So, he does a lot of no only no ghee. Is
that right?
>> Yeah.
>> You know, but a lot of um ghee fighters
I know that they use things like they do
pull-ups with a rope or with a kimono.
um with the actual ghee, which they say,
you know, this is really, really
specific and it's going to improve my
grip strength. Once again, just like the
deadlift, I'm not trying to build your
grip. It's like, yeah, of course, we're
going to get some carryover to grip
strength when we do these exercises, but
that's not the focus here. In fact, I
would prefer to give you lifting straps
to take the grip out of the equation so
that we can target the exact muscles
that I want to get stronger, which is
his back, which is his lats, his midback
muscles, and his biceps. That's all of
those pulling muscles. So don't let you
know the specificity interfere with your
main objective. The main objective is
strengthen the pull pattern grip. If I
do want him to have a strong grip and he
probably does have a strong grip, but
I'm going to give him specific grip
exercises after. All right, come for a
walk. So what we're going to do is just
um gradually he just did 7 and a half
kilogram dumbbells
because you know he trained yesterday.
He competed yesterday. So he's probably
not feeling very fresh.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Coming in today with a training session.
Um,
so I don't need to
I don't need to max him out or go super
take a seat or go super heavy. In fact,
right now I want him to walk out of the
session feeling like he could have done
way more. Um, let's go for a set of 20.
Okay, let's go a little bit. Yeah. So
the grip position that I like when I'm
rehabbing the pec is a more neutral
dumbbell position. Okay. So this is
where if I So let's have a look at this.
So if I use the pronated grip, which is
what a lot of people use. So come down.
When you're using a pronated grip,
naturally the elbows flare out more.
That increases the stretch on the pec,
which isn't bad. However, at this stage
of, you know, minor pec strain, I want
to kind of like minimize the exposure of
the pec and I want gradual
reintroduction of that muscle. So,
whenever you're doing I like to compare
it like I used to say I like to say one
technique this one is strengthening the
push pattern. The pronated way is
building pecs, right? So, if you're a
bodybuilder, you want to build pecs,
that's the technique that I would use.
If you're a strength athlete, it's not
really so much about I want to build
pecs or build delts. I want to
strengthen the push pattern. And the
neutral grip is the most comfortable
position for the shoulders and the pecs
to be able to do that. How did that
feel? Any pain?
>> Yeah, it feels good.
>> Excellent. So, that was probably about
20 reps.
Okay. Now, here these exercises aren't
as complex as the deadlift. So, the rest
between sets, however long it takes to
get from
one to the next. Let's go. Eight reps.
Let's talk about rep ranges.
When it comes to
an athlete, so it doesn't matter like
going to say jiu-jitsu fighter, but the
same for any athlete. You don't want to
replicate all of the demands of the
sport. I keep on saying that because
that's so damn important. You want to
treat the gym for what it's there for.
He strengthens all of his demands of his
sport by sparring eight times a week.
So, he's giving himself, you know, the
power work, the agility work, the
strength endurance work, all of that
stuff by training his actual sport in
real time. It doesn't get better than
that. The worst thing you can do is try
and imitate those movements in the gym
under load. Okay? one, it turns a
strength exercise into a not very good
strength exercise. And two, it can
actually interfere with the motor
patterns that's required of the sport.
So once you start lifting a weight that
slows down the correct motor pattern, it
now changes the motor pattern
completely. So um there's two reasons
why don't try and overthink it and think
what are the demands of my sport. What
do I need to train in the gym? In the
gym, you want to train your body so it's
strong and structurally balanced. The
way that we do that for the upper body
is a horizontal push pull and a vertical
push pull and the right amount of that
during the week. So today I'm not going
to do all of those. I'm only going to
choose one of those push patterns which
is like an incline. Is that a horizontal
push? I would consider that a horizontal
push. And his lat pull down is a
vertical pull. So on his other day, I
would say work towards a vertical push.
So a shoulder press and a horizontal
pull. So some type of a row pattern. All
right, let's take a seat. So, 12 1/2 kg.
When was the last time you did dumbbell
pressing?
>> Couple week ago.
>> How heavy did you go?
>> Uh, I was doing flat bench.
>> Yeah, like I think 40.
>> Yep. I don't want to go that heavy
today. Right. So, slowly slowly. So,
that was 12 and 1/2. Let's go 7 and 1/2.
And let's try set of 20 again.
>> Yeah.
>> Under normal circumstances, I wouldn't
say let's do sets of 20. Right. This is
purely to see how that pec is feeling.
Good.
Good. Drop those shoulders hard. Drop
those shoulders hard. Good. So, this is
a technique that I want to see is
depression of the entire shoulder
girdle. So, if you're under a bench and
you see you the distance between your
shoulders and your ears is short, I want
to increase that distance. So, drop the
entire shoulder girdle. The next thing
will happen is he's picking up his
sternum angle with that as well.
>> Look, we got visitors.
>> All right. Very good. That'll do.
That'll do.
>> Come in, Deny G.
>> Not at all.
>> Sorry, guys.
>> Not at all. You should
>> You should see This is Seb.
>> Hi, Seb.
>> You know what's funny? She makes fun of
me when she's wants to piss me off. She
calls me Seb. Oh, really?
>> Yeah.
>> That's Diana. That's my sister-in-law.
Oh, nice to meet you.
>> Nice to meet you.
>> Hi. What's up?
>> Hi, uncle. This is Billy Rose.
>> Yo, excuse me.
>> What a cute guy.
>> Say hi,
>> Rose.
>> Hi.
>> All right,
next thing. What's better, a lap pull
down or a pull-up? A lot of people get
upset with me when I choose a lat pull
down over a pull-up, but I'm going to
tell you something. I'm not really
choosing the pull down over the pull-up.
This is a secondary exercise. We've just
done deadlifts, and that's a pretty
demanding movement. And when we're doing
upper body as a secondary movement, then
I'd probably choose exercises that are a
lot less demanding. When people do
pull-ups, it's pretty hard for people to
do the technique that I want.
So, that's, you know, another good
reason why I like to do lat pull downs,
especially if you're doing a whole body
session. Let's go. Eight reps again.
Full stretch. Good.
Same again. I want you to drop the
entire shoulder girdle.
Good.
Increase the distance between the
shoulders and the ears. Right? So that's
the objective with this. So when you
want to hit the lats, if that's not
happening, then the lats just aren't
working the same way. So it's very
common that you know when people do this
exercise, they go, you know, shoulders
up here, right? This is upper traps
doing the work. This is how we get the
lats more active, dropping the entire
shoulder girdle. So that
is something that we want to avoid
>> for you. It's just very minor.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't know if that's a habit with
jiu-jitsu, like protecting your neck or
something.
>> Doing this all day.
>> Yeah.
>> Wrestling.
>> Okay. So that's um you know my
experience with working with fighters is
a lot of the positions that they use um
that are that are helpful in a fight
like the guarding position in a boxing
fight. So a lot of the boxers that I've
worked with have very rounded shoulders
which position them you know like you
know don't worry about so much about
posture but it's like what is it that
makes someone tight in this position a
lot of the times it's not just what's
tight it's what's long and weak. Okay.
So so whenever you you're put out put in
a funny position like this. So guarding
your face or guarding your neck which is
what a jiu-jitsu fighter does when
you're doing your push and pull
movements you know with this position
you're not hitting your lats very well.
All right. So that's um yeah, something
that we want to be working on. Let's go
back to the push. How's the peg?
Nothing.
>> Good.
>> Easy as. So now I'm in a position where
we've kind of agreed that his pec is not
torn. So that's how we kind of gently
reintroduced it by doing a very very
light weight with sets of 20. Now I
would say we don't really need to do
sets of 20 anymore. So let's bring it to
the eight rep range. So we're still
gradually increasing the load
>> with this grip.
>> Yep. Neutral grip. Drop the shoulders.
Increase the distance from the shoulder
between the shoulders and the ears.
Good. And pick up your sternum angle.
Good. Full stretch and drive. Good.
I'm not trying to replicate any push
pattern that he'd be doing in jiu-jitsu.
I'm trying to take his shoulder joint
through the full range of motion or the
pec muscle through the full range of
motion. Full length to full contraction.
How's the pec? Nothing.
>> No, it's fine.
>> Great. All right, we're going to keep
doing a few more sets. Nothing crazy. No
PBS or anything like that. We're just
going to keep on going up. But that's
the end of the session. Deadlifts as the
main movement, upper body push pull as a
secondary exercise. That actually took
us longer than usual, mainly because it
was a technique session and we're making
the video for you guys on YouTube. But,
you know, if you were to, if I was to
write out a program for Seb now, I would
say this is a great day for day one,
deadlifts with a with a pushpull. The
next day, I would say a squat pattern
with a push and a pull. And then maybe
an entire body day as day three. And I
think having a structure like that is
very suitable if you're a jiu-jitsu
fighter or a combat athlete or a rugby
player or a team sport athlete. It's
very similar demands and that's kind of
like something that you guys need to
think about. So I made an entire video
how I had the confidence to train Thor
Bjönson and I taught you guys the
lessons that I learned from Al who was
the coach of Michael Jordan or the
Chicago Bulls in the Michael Jordan era.
This is when I started learning lessons
of not replicating movement patterns in
the gym or movement patterns on the
playing field with resistance in the
gym. Anyway, hope you enjoyed that
session. We're going to get Seb to come
in and do another session at sometime
soon. Where can we find you if anyone
wants to find you for all of your
Brazilian jiu-jitsu expertise? Hit up my
Instagram, guys. EPS YouTube channel. I
got all the free source on there
Instagram page. The reels are going off
quick lessons, but the YouTube videos
are the best. They're long form. you can
get really good at jiu-jitsu. And just
like you guys are watching right now,
really in depth, maybe not that
in-depth, not as good as this guy, but
one day I'll be as good as this guy, but
at jiu-jitsu, so we'll keep moving. I I
doubt that. Um, but yeah, on his uh all
I know is I follow this guy on his
jiu-jitsu page, and he gives tons of
great knowledge on how to beat people up
in a fight, which every man should want
to know how to do, and woman and
everyone in between. Anyway, you're a
legend. Thank you for the session, my
man. and I'll um speak to you guys